---
layout: slate_posts
title: Local analysis made simple
permalink: local_post.html 
---
# Generally speaking
Two kinds of local analysis are possible, one invoked by the program `dec.py`,
the other by `amplian.py`. We will define these two as shotgun mode (albeit
improperly) and amplicon mode. The input is always a [sorted bam
file](input.html).

## Shotgun mode
This is performed when the amplicon is longer than the typical read length and
we don't want to focus our analysis on a specific region of this amplicon.
`dec.py` cuts on the aligment a set of overlapping regions (parameters can be
adjusted, run `dec.py -h` for help), and passes them to `diri_sampler` for error
correction and local haplotype reconstruction. This is the first step of the
[global analysis](global.html). Additionally, it runs `snv.py` for SNV calling.

## Amplicon mode
When the amplicon size is smaller than the read length or comparable to it, it
is in general more appropriate to use `amplian.py`, which extracts the multiple
alignment corresponding to the specified amplicon. By default, this includes
reads that cover at least 95% of the amplicon region (this can be adjusted
with the option `-m MIN_OVERLAP`). It then runs `diri_sampler` for error
correction and `snv.py` for SNV calling.

# Examples
#### Shotgun mode: `dec.py`
Run `dec.py -h` for help.
> \[user@host\]$ dec.py -h
> Usage: dec.py [options]
> Options:
> -h, --help   show this help message and exit
> -b IN\_BAM, --bam=IN\_BAM   file with aligned reads in .bam format
> -f IN\_FASTA, --fasta=IN\_FASTA   reference genome in fasta format

You should specify the window size (default is 201), add the `-k` flag
if you want to save intermediate files (for example, to check the
convergence of the Markov chain).

> \[user@host\]$ dec.py -b my\_sorted\_bam.bam -f ref_file.fasta -w 300 -k

#### Amplicon mode: amplian.py
> \[user@host\]$ amplian.py -b my\_sorted\_bam.bam -f ref_file.fasta -m 0.95

`amplian.py` uses the option `-m` to specify minimum overlap of the reads.

---
Go back [home](index.html)
